feat(mcp-capabilities): add MCP Capabilities plugins (#9732)
backstage/community-plugins: workspaces/mcp-capabilities/plugins/mcp-capabilities-backend/README.md

   gracefully, so an unreachable server never fails catalog ingestion.
2. **Backend plugin** — an on-demand router,
   `GET /api/mcp-capabilities/spec?entityRef=<ref>`, returning the full live
   tool / resource / prompt detail for the Capabilities tab.

The MCP client speaks the streamable-http transport with the JSON-RPC handshake
(`initialize` → `notifications/initialized` → capability-gated
`tools/list` / `resources/list` / `prompts/list`), is SSE-aware, and handles the
`Mcp-Session-Id` header.

## Installation

```sh
yarn --cwd packages/backend add @backstage-community/plugin-mcp-capabilities-backend
```

```ts
// packages/backend/src/index.ts
import { provideStaticCatalogModel } from '@backstage/plugin-catalog-node/alpha';
import { mcpServerApiEntityModel } from '@backstage/catalog-model/alpha';
import { mcpServerEnrichmentModelLayer } from '@backstage-community/plugin-mcp-capabilities-common';
import { catalogModuleMcpCapabilities } from '@backstage-community/plugin-mcp-capabilities-backend';

const backend = createBackend();

// Native mcp-server kind + the additive enrichment model layer
backend.add(
  provideStaticCatalogModel({

>     layers: [mcpServerApiEntityModel, mcpServerEnrichmentModelLayer],

Reviewer: People may already have this in place but also, the convention for the backend is to avoid these types of imports. Plugins should simply be a `backend.add(), with the import. Lets refactor this. 👍

Author: Sure

  }),
);

// Discovery: enrichment processor + on-demand /spec router
backend.add(import('@backstage-community/plugin-mcp-capabilities-backend'));
backend.add(catalogModuleMcpCapabilities);

backend.start();
```

Register some native `mcp-server` entities, e.g.:

```yaml
apiVersion: backstage.io/v1alpha1
kind: API
metadata:
  name: aws-docs
spec:
  type: mcp-server
  lifecycle: production
  owner: group:default/guests
  remotes:
    - type: streamable-http
      url: https://your-mcp-server.example.com/mcp
```

Verify:

```sh

> curl 'http://localhost:7007/api/mcp-capabilities/spec?entityRef=api:default/aws-docs'

Reviewer: You need a token, right? This won't work as is.

Author: Good catch, leftovers from testing phase on my local convoluted setup. This should be simple "open the tab in UI". I'll add a proper curl back if I'll decide include service-2-service on endpoints.

Author: At the end of the day I opted for including the 'service'.
Based on "landscape of possibilities among features on the map" of existing backstage project I work on for a client, some setups may need those.

```

## Limitations

- **Network reachability (backend egress).** Discovery runs from the Backstage
  **backend** — the catalog processor and the `/spec` route — which connect
  _outbound_ to each server's `spec.remotes[].url` over the MCP streamable-http
  transport. Your backend must therefore be able to reach every MCP server you
  register. Servers on a private network, behind a VPN, or firewalled need the
  backend to have a route to them (VPC/peering, allow-listed egress, or an HTTP
  proxy). The browser never connects to the MCP server directly, so this is a
  backend-egress concern, not a CORS one.

> - **Unreachable or slow servers.** Discovery is time-boxed (15s in the catalog

Reviewer: I would call this out much more strongly, on a decently large Catalog this will have a massive impact on the overall processing and stitching of ALL entities: https://backstage.io/docs/features/software-catalog/life-of-an-entity

Author: Sure, I'll think how should I reframe it.

Author: Addressed this one too, I hope it won't confuse a reader.

# @backstage-community/plugin-mcp-capabilities-backend

Backend plugin for the MCP Capabilities suite. It exposes an on-demand endpoint,
`GET /api/mcp-capabilities/spec?entityRef=<ref>`, that connects live to a native
`API` / `spec.type: mcp-server` catalog entity's remote (read from
`spec.remotes[].url`) and returns the full tool / resource / prompt detail that
powers the Capabilities tab.

It speaks the streamable-http transport via the official
[`@modelcontextprotocol/sdk`](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/typescript-sdk)
client (handshake, capability-gated `tools/list` / `resources/list` /
`prompts/list`, SSE, session handling).

> Persisting a searchable summary onto entities is a **separate, opt-in**
> concern handled by
> [`@backstage-community/plugin-catalog-backend-module-mcp-capabilities`](../catalog-backend-module-mcp-capabilities/README.md).
> This plugin serves live detail only.

## Installation

```sh
yarn --cwd packages/backend add @backstage-community/plugin-mcp-capabilities-backend
```

> `mcp-server` entities are native `API` entities whose specType is defined by the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`mcp-server` entities are of Kind API whose `specType` is defined by the
```

upstream `mcpServerApiEntityModel` layer (it uses `spec.remotes` in place of the
usual `spec.definition`), so it must be registered or the entities won't
validate. Register that layer, then add this plugin:

```ts
// packages/backend/src/index.ts
import { provideStaticCatalogModel } from '@backstage/plugin-catalog-node/alpha';
import { mcpServerApiEntityModel } from '@backstage/catalog-model/alpha';

// If your app already calls provideStaticCatalogModel, add mcpServerApiEntityModel
// to that single call instead of adding a second one.
backend.add(provideStaticCatalogModel({ layers: [mcpServerApiEntityModel] }));
backend.add(import('@backstage-community/plugin-mcp-capabilities-backend'));
```

> Then register some `mcp-server` entities, e.g.:

Reviewer: Do we want to link to the official docs on this instead or in addition to this?

https://backstage.io/docs/ai/ai-in-the-catalog
